.. _introduction:

Introduction
============

The reliable production and availability of the National Center for Environmental Prediction's (NCEP) guidance products plays a critical role in the mission of the National Weather Service to provide forecasts and warnings “for the protection of life and property and the enhancement of the national economy.”
This document outlines policies and technical standards that must be met in order to implement operational code or numerical models in the production suite running on the Weather & Climate Operational Supercomputing System (WCOSS) and maintained by NCEP Central Operations’ (NCO) Implementation and Data Services Branch (IDSB).
WCOSS is currently composed of a GDIT managed Cray-EX cluster located in Manassas, VA and Phoenix, AZ.
The coding standards, examples of operational-quality scripts and code, and best practices presented have been established to enable operational stability, efficient troubleshooting and improved Environmental Equivalence (EE) between environments within NCO and between NCO and developing organizations.

.. note::
   The original document contained the NCEP logo here. 

.. _workflow:

Workflow
========

In the production environment, all jobs are scheduled and submitted to the WCOSS resource manager, PBS Pro, by ecFlow.
EcFlow is a workflow manager developed and maintained by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) with an intuitive GUI that is used to handle dependencies, schedule jobs, and monitor the production suite.
Each job in ecFlow is associated with an ecFlow script which gets processed to generate a ``job card`` (a.k.a. ``submission script``) whose function is to set ``PBS`` (job scheduler) directives and much of the execution environment (see `Standard Environment Variables`_) and call the ``J-job`` to execute processing.
The processing of the ecFlow script handles the substitution of ecFlow variables and files accessed via "%include" statements;
the resulting ``job card`` is then handed off to PBS Pro via ``qsub``.
The purpose of the ``J-job`` is fourfold: to set up location (application/data directory) variables, to set up temporal (date/cycle) variables, to initialize the data and working directories, and to call the ``ex-script``.
The ``ex-script`` is the driver for the bulk of the application, including data-staging in the working directory, setting up any model-specific variables, moving data to long-term storage, sending products off WCOSS via DBNet and performing appropriate validation and error checking.
It may call one or more ``ush`` (a.k.a. ``utility``) scripts.
Additional discussion and examples of the workflow can be found in `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_.
All variables relating to the environment in which a job will run must be set, depending on the variable, within the job card or the ``J-job``.
To move a model from development to production, it must only be necessary to change the variables exported in the job cards.
Downstream scripts must always use the variables established in the ``J-job`` and must never alter them.

Workflow Diagram::

  job card
    -> J-job
        -> ex-script
            -> ush
                -> utility script(s)
                -> compiled executable(s)



.. _variables_formats_utilities:

Standard Variables, Formats, and Utilities
===========================================

.. _standard_environment_variables:

A. Standard Environment Variables
---------------------------------

A standard set of environment variables has been established to simplify the production workflow and improve the troubleshooting process.
Table 1 delineates standard environment variables and where they are typically set in the production workflow.
They must be used wherever appropriate. In the production environment, the variables with “job card” under “Where Set” in Table 1 are defined in the job card generated by ecFlow.
Several are set by loading the ``prod_envir`` module.
Developers should likewise have a job card for each job which loads any required modules and sets these variables to the correct values prior to calling the ``J-job``.
Variables that are not used in a given job need not be defined (keep the ``J-job`` clutter-free!).

**Table 1: A list of the standard environment variables**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Variable Name","Description","Where Set"
   "``envir``","Set to “test” during the initial testing phase, “para” when running in parallel (on a schedule), and “prod” in production.","job card"
   "``PACKAGEROOT``","Root directory for the application, e.g. ``$OPSROOT/packages``","job card"
   "``OPSROOT``","Operations root directory, e.g. ``/lfs/$FS/ops/$envir``","job card"
   "``job``","Unique job name (unique per cycle)","job card"
   "``jobid``","Unique job identifier, typically ``$job.$PBS_JOBID``","job card"
   "``NET``","Model name (first level of com directory structure)","J-job"
   "``RUN``","Name of model run (third level of com directory structure)","J-job"
   "``PDY``","Date in YYYYMMDD format","J-job"
   "``PDYm#``","Dates of a previous day in YYYYMMDD format ( ``$PDYm1`` is yesterday’s date, i.e. “present day minus 1”, etc.)","J-job"
   "``PDYp#``","Dates of a future day in YYYYMMDD format ( ``$PDYp1`` is tomorrow’s date, i.e. “present day plus 1”, etc.)","J-job"
   "``cyc``","Cycle time in GMT hours, formatted HH","job card"
   "``cycle``","Cycle time in GMT, formatted tHHz or tHHMMz","J-job"
   "``subcyc``","Cycle time in GMT minutes, formatted MM","job card"
   "``DATAROOT``","Directory containing the working directory, typically ``$OPSROOT/tmp`` in production","job card "
   "``DATA``","Location of the job working directory, typically ``$DATAROOT/$jobid``","J-job"
   "``HOMEmodel``","Application home directory, typically ``$PACKAGEROOT/model.vX.Y.Z``","job card"
   "``USHmodel``","Location of the model’s ush files, typically ``$HOMEmodel/ush``","J-job"
   "``EXECmodel``","Location of the model’s exec files, typically ``$HOMEmodel/exec``","J-job"
   "``PARMmodel``","Location of the model’s parm files, typically ``$HOMEmodel/parm``","J-job"
   "``FIXmodel``","Location of the model’s fix files, typically ``$HOMEmodel/fix``","J-job"
   "``COMROOT``","com root directory for input/output data on current system, typically ``$OPSROOT/com``","job card"
   "``COMIN``","com directory for current model's input data, typically ``$COMROOT/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY``","J-job"
   "``COMOUT``","com directory for current model's output data, typically ``$COMROOT/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY``","J-job"
   "``COMINmodel``","com directory for incoming data from model ``model``","J-job"
   "``COMOUTmodel``","com directory for outgoing data for model ``model``","J-job"
   "``DCOMROOT``","dcom root directory, typically ``$OPSROOT/dcom``","job card"
   "``DCOMIN``","dcom directory for current model's input data","J-job"
   "``DCOMINdatatype``","dcom directory for incoming data from datatype ``datatype``","J-job"
   "``DBNROOT``","Root directory for the data-alerting utilities","job card"
   "``SENDECF``","Boolean [#]_ variable used to control ecflow_client child commands","job card"
   "``SENDDBN``","Boolean [#]_ variable used to control sending products off WCOSS2","job card"
   "``SENDDBN_NTC``","Boolean [#]_ variable used to control sending products with WMO headers off WCOSS2","job card"
   "``SENDCOM``","Boolean [#]_ variable to control data copies to ``$COMOUT``","job card"
   "``SENDWEB``","Boolean [#]_ variable used to control sending products to a web server, often ncorzdm","job card"
   "``model_ver``","version number of package in three digits; where ``package`` is the model's directory name","job card"
   "``module_ver``","Version of module ``module`` which is used at runtime by model ``model``","version file"
   "``extmodel_ver``","version of external model dependencies; specified with two digit version number","version file"
   "``KEEPDATA``","Boolean [#]_ variable used to specify whether or not the working directory should be kept upon successful job completion.","job card"
   "``MAILTO``","List of email addresses to send email to","job card"
   "``MAILCC``","List of email addresses to cc on email","job card"



.. [#] boolean variables are set to “YES” or “NO” (all caps) 


B. File Name Conventions
------------------------

Standard file naming conventions must also be used.
File names must not contain special characters, uppercase characters or the date (the directory in which the file resides will contain the date).
File names must indicate the name of the model run, the cycle, the type of data the file contains, the resolution of the data (if applicable), other data related elements, the three-digit forecast hour the data represents (if applicable), and the file type.
Please adhere to the following:

* For all model types:
    * Use periods to separate categories and use underscores to separate words within the same category
    * Use a “p” in describing a “point” within a grid resolution. Ex. 0.25 = ``0p25``
    * Use a leading 0 in describing a grid resolution that is less than 1.
    * Include an “f” in front of the forecast hour
    * Pad forecast hours with zeros so that all files have the same number of digits
    * In cases where there is no forecast hour, but rather it is output that is before the cycle time, “tm” may be substituted for “f” in the filename.
    * ``domain`` does not need to be included in the filename if there is only one domain used by the model
    * ASCII inventory files (output of wgrib/wgrib2) should end with the extension “.grib2.idx”. Ex. ``hrrr.t10z.wrfnatf01.grib2.idx``
    * Other index files (in binary format) should end with the extension “.bin.idx”
    * If ``var_info`` includes multiple pieces of information, they should be separated with a period. This includes resolution if there are multiple resolutions produced. Ex. ``gefs.t06z.avg.pres_a.0p50.f006.grib2``, ``etss.t00z.stormsurge.2p5km.conus.grib2``
* Output file names must be consistent across environments and application versions, so variables such as ``$job``, ``$envir``, and ``$model_ver`` must not be used to define file names.
* Public products can be produced in any of the following formats: netcdf, bufr, grib2, ascii
* If the directory structure includes the cycle, it should be a subdirectory. ``<model>.YYYYMMDD/HH/``
* For coupled models in particular:
    * Output directory structure should have subdirectories for each model component Ex. ``gefs.YYYYMMDD/HH/atmos/``

Filename format for files in ``com``:

* non-ensemble: atmospheric, hydro models: ``model.tHHz.var_info.f###.domain.format``
* ensemble: atmospheric, hydro models: ``model.tHHz.ens_mem.var_info.f###.domain.format``
* non-ensemble: coupled models: ``model.component.tHHz.var_info.f###.domain.format``
* ensemble: coupled models: ``model.component.tHHz.ens_mem.var_info.f###.domain.format``
* hurricane models: ``model.tHHz.storm_name.var_info.f###.domain.format``
* space weather models: ``model.var_info.valid_time.domain.format``

Example filenames for files in ``com`` ( ``HH`` is the cycle/hour):

* ``rtofs_glo.tHHz.std.f180.west_conus.grib2``
* ``aqm.tHHz.8hr_o3.227.grib2`` (227 is the domain in this case)
* ``sref.tHHz.pgrb216.p10_3hrly.grib2.idx`` → ``sref.tHHz.p10.pres_3hrly.216.grib2.idx``
* ``gefs.chem.tHHz.a2d_0p25.f###.grib2`` → ``gefs.chem.tHHz.a2d.0p25.f###.grib2``

Filename format for files in the ``wmo`` sub-directory: ``format.model.tHHz.awp_var_info.f###.domain`` 

Example filenames for files in the wmo sub-directory:

* ``grib2.aqm.tHHz.08hr_o3.227``
* ``grib2.akrtma.tHHz.2dvaranl.198``
* ``grib2.sref.tHHz.spread.212``


C. Production Utilities
-----------------------

The utilities listed below must be used to assist in accomplishing certain tasks for all WCOSS models.
They are accessible through the ``prod_util`` module.
This module will put the below utility scripts in your environment’s ``PATH`` and define other useful environment variables.
The module is automatically loaded in all production jobs and should be loaded in development job cards.
See `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_ for examples of these utilities in use.

``prep_step``
  ``prep_step`` unsets the ``FORT##`` variables used to pass unit assignments to Intel Fortran executables.
  Since there may be multiple Fortran programs running in a job, these variables must be reset before each program execution.

``startmsg`` *
  ``startmsg`` posts the start time of a program to ``stdout``.

``postmsg`` *
  ``postmsg`` writes a message to a log file.
  The first argument is the log file name and the second is the message.
  The log file will default to stdout.

*startmsg and postmsg are no longer required in operations but the utilities will continue to be maintained.

``err_chk`` / ``err_exit``
  It is imperative that all production code and scripts broadly employ error checking to catch and recover from errors as quickly as possible.
  The context of the error must be communicated as descriptively as possible and prefaced with “WARNING:” or “FATAL ERROR:”.
  Failures must not be allowed to propagate downstream of the point where the problem can first be detected;
  jobs should fail with ``err_chk`` or ``err_exit`` as soon as a fatal error is encountered.
  ``err_chk`` is used to check and handle the ``$err`` variable which has been set to a program’s return code and exported into the environment.
  If ``$err=0``, err_chk does nothing and job execution continues.
  If ``$err`` is non-zero, the job is aborted.
  ``err_exit`` will write an error message with the time of the error, and immediately abort the job in PBS Pro.
  It accepts an error string as input to which it will prepend “FATAL ERROR.”

``cpreq``
  ``cpreq`` is used to copy files that are essential to an application.
  If the copy is unsuccessful for any reason, then a FATAL ERROR will be printed and the job will abort immediately.
  It has the same usage as the standard ``cp`` command.

``cpfs``
  ``cpfs`` is used to copy files while ensuring that the whole file has been copied before it becomes accessible so that downstream applications will not attempt to copy or read a partial file.
  It has the same usage as the standard ``cp`` command with the limitation that it may only copy one file at a time (no globbing).
  It is most useful for copies across file systems or for very large files.
  ``cpfs $COMIN/$file $new_file`` will execute the following:

  .. code-block:: bash

     cpreq $COMIN/$file $new_file.cptmp
     $FSYNC $new_file.cptmp
     mv $new_file.cptmp $new_file

  ``cpfs`` calls the ``err_exit`` utility if either the cp or mv step returns non-zero status.
  However, as a further check, verify that a source file exists before calling ``cpfs``.
  If the job should continue without the file, skip the ``cpfs`` call and continue.
  If the job should fail if the source file does not exist, call err_exit directly.

``compath.py``
  The ``compath.py`` utility is used to discover the current absolute path of a given ``com`` directory and is used to set COMIN and COMOUT variables in ``J-jobs``.
  ``compath.py`` accepts the relative path of the directory you wish to use data from as an argument;
  the corresponding absolute path is returned:

  .. code-block:: bash

     COMIN=${COMIN:-$(compath.py $envir/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY)}
     COMINm1=${COMINm1:-$(compath.py $envir/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDYm1)}
     COMINgfs=${COMINgfs:-$(compath.py $envir/gfs/$gfs_ver/gfs.$PDY)}
     COMOUT=${COMOUT:-$(compath.py -o $NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY)}

  Run ``compath.py --help`` to see all usage options.
  To use non-production data, in the job card set the ``$COMPATH`` environment variable to a list of absolute paths.
  ``compath.py`` will search those paths for a match before defaulting to production data.
  Example: ``export COMPATH="$COMROOT/nco:/dev/noscrub/First.Last/prod/com/gfs"``

``mail.py``
  When nonfatal errors occur that may impact the quality of the model output, such as when backup data is used, it is important to notify the appropriate parties so that the error can be addressed.
  The ``mail.py`` utility is used to send an e-mail notification from any node on the system.
  To notify production staff of a nonfatal but significant issue with a production job, one might execute:

  .. code-block:: bash

     msg="WARNING: Primary data source unavailable. Backup data is being used."
     echo "$msg" | mail.py

  An addressee list can be included on the command line or set in advance via environment variable ``$MAILTO``.
  To copy someone, use the “-c” flag:

  .. code-block:: bash

     echo "$msg" | mail.py –c <someones_email_address>

  Run ``mail.py -h`` after loading the ``prod_util`` module to see additional options.
  Note that e-mail is only sent in jobs run by NCO.
  Jobs run by others will merely print the message to stdout.

``getsystem``
  ``getsystem`` simply tells you which WCOSS system you are on.
  This utility exists for command line execution and must not be used in any operational packages.
  Table 2 shows what you can expect to receive when running this utility on a given system with a given set of option flags:

**Table 2: getsystem output**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "System","no flags","–p"
   "Dogwood phase 1","Dogwood","Dogwood-p1"
   "Cactus phase 1","Cactus","Cactus-p1"



D. Date Utilities
-----------------

The following utilities are used to manage dates in the production suite.
They must be used wherever current dates are employed to enable proper scheduling and ensure that all jobs work as expected when crossing over to a new year.
The following date utilities are accessed by loading the ``prod_util`` module.

``finddate.sh``
  Given a date, ``finddate.sh`` will return a date (in ``YYYYMMDD`` format) a specified number of days before or after the given date.
  It may also provide a sequence of dates leading to the specified number of days before or after the given date.
  Example 1 shows how to use ``finddate.sh``.

**Example 1: Using finddate.sh**

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh
   module load prod_util/$prod_util_ver

   PDY=20220101

   # Single date example
   ten_days_ago=$(finddate.sh $PDY d-10)
   ten_days_ahead=$(finddate.sh $PDY d+10)

   # Sequence example
   last_four_days=$(finddate.sh $PDY s-4)
   next_four_days=$(finddate.sh $PDY s+4)

   echo "Today's date is $PDY"
   echo "The date ten days ago was $ten_days_ago"
   echo "The date in ten days will be $ten_days_ahead"
   echo "The last four days were $last_four_days"
   echo "The next four days are $next_four_days"

**Output**

.. code-block:: text

   Today's date is 20220101
   The date ten days ago was 20211222
   The date in ten days will be 20220111
   The last four days were 20211231 20211230 20211229 20211228
   The next four days are 20220102 20220103 20220104 20220105



``ndate``
  ``ndate`` is accessible by the variable ``$NDATE`` once the ``prod_util`` module has been loaded.
  ``ndate`` is a date utility that will return a date in YYYYMMDDHH format.
  Given no arguments, it will return the current date/hour. ``ndate`` takes up to two arguments, namely ``fhour`` and ``idate``: ``ndate [fhour [idate]]``.
  ``fhour`` is a forecast hour (may be negative) and defaults to zero.
  ``idate`` is the initial date in YYYYMMDDHH format and defaults to the current date.
  Example 2 shows how to use ``ndate``.

**Example 2: Using ndate**

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh
   module load prod_util/$prod_util_ver

   PDYHH=$($NDATE)

   # Single date example
   ten_days_ago=$($NDATE -240 $PDYHH)
   ten_days_ahead=$($NDATE 240 $PDYHH)

   # cycle examples
   next_cycle=$($NDATE 06 $PDYHH)
   prev_cycle=$($NDATE -06 $PDYHH)

   echo "Today's date and cycle is $PDYHH"
   echo "The date ten days ago was $ten_days_ago"
   echo "The date in ten days will be $ten_days_ahead"
   echo "Six hours from now will be $next_cycle"
   echo "Six hours ago was $prev_cycle"

**Output**

.. code-block:: text

   Today's date and cycle is 2022010112
   The date ten days ago was 2021122212
   The date in ten days will be 2022011112
   Six hours from now will be 2022010118
   Six hours ago was 2022010106



``setpdy.sh``
  ``setpdy.sh`` creates a file ``PDY`` that is sourced to export the standard date variables ``PDYmnm``, ``PDYm{nm-1}``, ..., ``PDYm2``, ``PDYm1``, ``PDY``, ``PDYp1``, ``PDYp2``, ..., ``PDYp{np-1}``, ``PDYpnp``.
  By default, ``nm`` and ``np`` are 7 but can be altered by providing alternate numbers as input parameters.
  The variable ``cycle`` must be set (in ‘tHHz’ format) prior to execution.
  The default date is the current day’s date as defined in the file ``$COMDATEROOT/date/$cycle``, but it can be overridden by setting the variable ``PDY`` prior to execution.
  The date files in ``$COMDATEROOT/date`` are set at 11:30 UTC and 23:30 UTC.
  At 23:30, the date files for cycles 00–11 are incremented to the next day.
  At 11:30, the date files for cycles 12–23 are likewise advanced.
  Therefore, if you were to set ``cycle`` to t12z and run ``setpdy.sh`` between 00:00 and 11:30, you would get a PDY file centered on the previous day’s date (unless variable ``PDY`` was imported). Example 3 shows how to use ``setpdy.sh``.

**Example 3: Using setpdy.sh (assuming current date is 20160101)**

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh
   module load prod_util/$prod_util_ver
   export cycle=t12z

   setpdy.sh 8 3
   . ./PDY

   echo "Yesterday's date was $PDYm1"

**Contents of file PDY**

.. code-block:: bash

   export PDYm8=20151224
   export PDYm7=20151225
   export PDYm6=20151226
   export PDYm5=20151227
   export PDYm4=20151228
   export PDYm3=20151229
   export PDYm2=20151230
   export PDYm1=20151231
   export PDY=20160101
   export PDYp1=20160102
   export PDYp2=20160103
   export PDYp3=20160104

**Output**

.. code-block:: text

   Yesterday's date was 20151231



E. GRIB Utilities
-----------------

GRIB is a data format commonly used across the production model suite at NCEP and in Numerical Weather Prediction worldwide.
NCO supports several utilities responsible for manipulating GRIB data. These utilities are accessible in production via the ``grib_util`` and ``wgrib2`` modules.
The module will define numerous environment variables. See Table 6 (in `Appendix B: Variables and Directory Structure Tables`_) for all variable definitions and descriptions of each utility.
The module must be loaded in the job cards of jobs using GRIB utilities:

.. code-block:: bash

   module load grib_util/$grib_util_ver
   module load wgrib2/$wgrib2_ver

.. _standards:

Standards
=========

A. General Application Standards
--------------------------------

Diagnosing failures quickly is a necessary component of maintaining a suite of products that boasts a greater than 99% on-time delivery rate.
To that end, all code must be scrutinized for both stability and ease of troubleshooting and recovery.
It is not practical to discuss all of the steps that can or should be taken to write operational-quality code, but here are some things that should be considered:

* **Notification of use of backup data**
    For scripts that have a secondary data source to be used when the primary data is not available, the script must include a message that indicates the primary data is not available and backup data is being used.
    If continued use of backup data will result in a degraded product, the developer should work with NCO’s SPA team to include code to notify the appropriate parties when primary data is unavailable.
    The ``mail.py`` utility can be useful in this regard.
* **Data of opportunity**
    It is acceptable to use data from a server or other source that is not supported 24/7.
    However, the application cannot fail when this data is missing.
    Appropriate notification must be logged indicating that the job is continuing without this data source (similar to use of backup data above).
* **Descriptive error messages**
    Fatal errors must print a descriptive message beginning with “FATAL ERROR:”.
    Warnings or non-fatal error messages must be prefaced with “WARNING:”.
    As with executable code, error messages in scripts must be written so that if an issue arises, the context of that error or failure is communicated as early and as clearly as possible.
* **Appropriate modes of failure**
    An executable must not terminate abnormally with a segmentation or memory fault for errors that are discoverable/trappable.
    For example, lack of input data must be handled either in the script before the executable runs, or by the executable if checking in the script is not practical.
    All scripts that depend on the existence of a certain type of input or restart data to successfully run must check for the existence of such data before running and report an informative fatal error if the needed data is missing.
* **Recovery from code failure or abnormal system failure**
    Restart capability must be applied to an operational job to save time when recovering from a failure.
    Long running jobs that have multiple executable calls might be a good candidate to break into two smaller jobs so that if a failure occurs, only the part with the problem needs to be rerun, thus the time to completion is shorter.
    An example of this would be to submit a separate post-processing job for each forecast hour, so any failure for one forecast hour does not impact others, and can be recovered from quickly.
    Any job that runs longer than 15 minutes is required to have restart capability built in such that the process picks up where it left off when rerun.
    For a forecast job, this would involve writing out checkpoint or restart files at fixed intervals during the forecast, from which the model can be restarted.
    The job scripts must be designed so this restart will happen automatically if the job is rerun.
    Any products delivered by a restarted production job must not be delayed by more than 15 minutes.
    Data assimilation jobs are exempt from this requirement, but steps should be taken to minimize runtimes and enhance re-runnability of these processes.
* **No background processing**
    ``PBS Pro`` loses control of processes when they are put in the background.
    Therefore, background processing must be avoided. Killing a ``PBS Pro`` job must terminate all processes running under it.
* **No external-pointing symlinks**
    Symbolic links to resources outside of the application directory or package (e.g. links to absolute paths) are not allowed within the package.
    When external resources are required, their paths must be obtained from production module variables (when available) or defined as variables in the version file and ecf script and used wherever the external resource is needed.
* **Working directories**
    Working directories must contain a unique identifier (job id) unless there is an application need to share the directory across multiple jobs (e.g. a forecast job writing output that is needed by a post job running in parallel).
    Working directories must be removed upon successful completion of the run.
    All data that is needed for longer than one cycle must be copied to ``$COMOUT``.
    MPMD child processes must do their work in separate subdirectories of the main working directory to avoid cases where multiple processes might create/modify/remove the same file simultaneously.
* **Text formatting**
    All text files (scripts, source code, config files, etc.), as well as standard output for all jobs/scripts, must only use the basic ASCII character set, with no Windows-format carriage returns, stylized quotation marks, or other non-standard characters.
* **Documentation Blocks**
    Source code and scripts must be annotated with information that may help staff remedy a problem if something goes awry.
    In some cases, too much information is as bad as none at all.
    We ask that you use your best judgment to include information that will be of the most help in troubleshooting potential issues.
    Example 4 shows a suggested format for a documentation block (DOCBLOCK).
* **Points of contact**
    All applications running in production must have a primary and backup support contact reachable 24/7 in case of operational failures.
* **Cold starts**
    All jobs that depend on restart data from previous runs must include a cold restart option.
    Cold start is the ability to run using the current inputs and observations without any data from previous runs.
    The cold start option must be activated by the addition of “``export COLDSTART=YES``” in the job card
* **Removal of dead code**
    After initial coding updates/debugging efforts, executable statements that are made inert by commenting must be removed.
    Rely on configuration management software for content differentials.

**Example 4: DOCBLOCK template***

.. code-block:: text

   # Program Name:
   # Author(s)/Contact(s):
   # Abstract:
   # History Log:
   #   <brief list of changes to this source file>
   #
   # Usage:
   #  Parameters: <Specify typical arguments passed>
   #  Input Files:
   #    <list file names and briefly describe the data they include>
   #  Output Files:
   #    <list file names and briefly describe the information they include>
   #
   # Condition codes:
   #    < list exit condition or error codes returned >
   #    If appropriate, descriptive troubleshooting instructions or
   #    likely causes for failures could be mentioned here with the
   #    appropriate error code
   #
   # User controllable options: <if applicable>

* Use appropriate comment indicator (#, !, or //) where appropriate. 


B. Compiled Code (C or Fortran source)
--------------------------------------

Compiled code must be written in either C/C++ or Fortran.
C and Fortran compilers must be the latest available version of the Intel or Cray (``cc``, ``CC``, and ``ftn``) compiler collections.
All libraries must be approved for production use. Approved libraries are found by running ``module avail`` in a default environment.
Hidden modules are not allowed to be used in production.
Makefiles must only include compilers and libraries using variables defined in modules:

* Within the build script or build module in the parent sorc directory:

    .. code-block:: bash

       module load cpe-cray
       module load intel/$intel_ver
       module load w3nco/$w3nco_ver

* Within the makefile:

    .. code-block:: make

       LIBS = ${W3NCO_LIB4}
       ndate: ndate.f
              $(FC) –o ndate ndate.f $(LIBS)

* A build modulefile must be provided for all builds.
    See Example 11, Example 12, and Example 13 in `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_ for an example build script, modulefile, and makefile, respectively.
* Do not specify absolute paths to executables, libraries, or any other products inside the source code or build system.
* If a module file does not provide a certain desired variable, the necessary value should be derived from the module file's contents programmatically as opposed to hardcoded (e.g., when using ``bufr`` module, use ``"$BUFR_INC4/bufrlib.h"`` not ``"/lfs/h1/ops/prod/libs/intel/19.1.1.217/bufr/11.4.0/include_d/bufrlib.h"``).
* This way, if a module version is upgraded, no further modifications will be necessary for the code to compile and run with the appropriate libraries and executables.
* Code must compile without errors or warnings. Errors and warnings may not be suppressed, and the compiler warning level ("-W" options) must be at least the default one.
* Errors must be caught as early as possible and the context of the error must be communicated clearly.
* Failures must not be allowed to propagate past the point where the problem is first detectable.
* “Missing GFS data” is not an adequate error message. Indicate the specific GFS file and directory that is missing in the error message.
* Input/output errors must be handled gracefully. See available I/O control options to trap errors and add logic to allow the code to continue or fail as appropriate.
* When an executable aborts, has other problems, or needs to be tested, it is vitally important to know which disk files it uses for input and output.
* To accomplish this, the following is required:
    a) Paths of files outside a job's working directory (e.g., input data from ``COMIN`` or ``DCOM``) must not be hard-coded in the source code, but rather defined in the calling script.
    This can be done in one of the following ways:
       * By using ``FILE=var`` option in the ``OPEN`` statement, where var is a character variable;
           the variable value must be exported to the shell environment before calling the executable and retrieved from the environment by either the routine ``GETENV`` (Fortran extension, requires "use IFPORT" in ifort) or the Fortran-2003 standard intrinsic ``GET_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE``.
       * (An ifort extension) by omitting the ``FILE=`` option, in which case the file name must be set by exporting the value of the character ``FORTn`` variable, where n is the Fortran I/O unit number as set in the ``OPEN`` statement.
           For ifort, n is any positive integer fitting in a 4-byte variable.
           The production utility ``prep_step`` (clearing the values of all FORTn variables) must be called before each executable if this method is used.
       * By omitting the ``FILE=var`` option, and not setting the ``FORTn`` variable, in which case the default file name “fort.n” will be used by the executable.
           This method is allowed only if this file is a symbolic link, eg: ``ln -sf $DATA/pgrbf01 fort.11``.
    b) It must be clear, by looking at the file names defined before calling the executable, which files are read from (input), written to (output), and which are both read and written within the same executable (work files).
       It can be ensured by one of the following:
          * Using numbers 11-49 for input, 51-79 for output, 80-94 for work files (preferred method for executables opening a small number of files).
          * Exporting separately the three groups of file names with appropriate headers / comments at the top of each block.
* Good programming practices must be followed to improve readability. For example, structured control must be used instead of ``GO TO`` statements, and code must be well documented.
* Executables should be built with production compilation settings and tested for and ridded of memory leaks/allocation problems with, e.g., ``valgrind4hpc``


C. Interpreted Code (bash, ksh, perl, or python scripts)
---------------------------------------------------------

Each “job” is associated with a single ``J-job``, located in the ``jobs`` subdirectory.
The ``J-job`` sets up the environment and calls an ``ex-script`` script located in the ``scripts`` subdirectory.
All ``J-jobs`` must follow the naming convention ``JAAAAA``: all capital letters beginning with the letter ‘J’ with no extension.
``J-jobs`` must use Bash (``/bin/bash`` or ``/bin/sh``, the latter invokes Bash in POSIX mode on WCOSS) or Korn Shell (``/bin/ksh``).
``Ex-scripts`` and utility scripts must be written in Bash, Korn shell, Perl, or Python.
``Ex-scripts`` must follow the naming convention ``exaaaaa.sh``: all lowercase beginning with the letters ‘ex’ and ending with the appropriate extension (‘.sh’, ‘.pl’, ‘.py’).
Any sub-scripts to the ``ex-script`` will be located in the ``ush`` subdirectory, be named in all lowercase letters **not** beginning with the letters ‘ex,’ and must end with the appropriate extension.
Underscores are permitted in all file names.

Please also observe the following points:

* Enable debug logging at the top of *each* shell script:
    .. code-block:: bash

       set -x

    and add timing info to the execution trace by including the following in the J-job:
    .. code-block:: bash

       export PS4='+ $SECONDS + '

* ``setpdy.sh`` must be called after cd to the working directory (``$DATA``)
* Utilize standard environment variables and utilities (See `Standard Variables, Formats, and Utilities`_).
* Each block of dbnet alerts must be wrapped with logic testing whether the variable ``$SENDDBN`` or ``$SENDDBN_NTC``, as applicable, is set to “``YES``”.
* Each execution of a C or Fortran code must be wrapped with the production utilities ``prep_step``, if applicable, and ``err_chk``.
* Any executions that print verbose output (more than 100 lines or so per execution) must redirect standard output and standard error to a file under ``$DATA``, for example:
    .. code-block:: bash

       $EXECmodel/$pgm >> $pgmout 2> errfile

* Production utilizes a centralized cleanup of directories in COMROOT.
    Production scripts must not remove directories at the ``$COMROOT/$NET/$ver/$RUN.$PDY`` level.
* Output must conform to the output structure of ``$COMROOT/$NET/$ver/$RUN.$PDY``.
* Do not assume that the current directory (“.”) will be in the execution path (``$PATH``).
    (Invoke temporary script as ``$DATA/scriptx`` or ``./scriptx``).
* Model scripts and executables should be called explicitly, eg, ``$USHmodel/scriptx``.
    (``$USHmodel`` and ``$EXECmodel`` should not be added to ``$PATH``).
* Remove all references to developer work areas and all development tools (benchmarking, etc.) before submitting to IDSB.
* If your application should continue if a preceding step fails, it must be documented in a comment in the script just before (or after) the relevant part is called and a descriptive “WARNING:” message printed to stdout.
* Never write to dcom! Unless you run data ingest from an outside source.
* Ensure that files containing restricted data are assigned the appropriate group and permissions.
* There must be no false/misleading errors and no syntax errors in the standard output/error file.
* Ensure all non-zero stops, aborts, calls to err_exit, etc are for good reason.
    (Eg, consider whether a bad observation should be skipped rather than causing the job to fail).
* The interpreter must be added to the top of all shell scripts with a "#!" statement.
* Shell scripts must be invoked directly (eg, “``<path_to_script>``”, not “``sh <path_to_script>``“).
* All packages that use Python scripts must specify a Python version through the module system, and must only call a Python executable that is from a module, not the system version.
* "``module load python/${python_ver:?}``" or similar must be present in all job files that will lead to python script calls, where the python version is defined in the version file.
* Python version must be at version 3 or higher.

Reference `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_ for commented examples of a version file, ecFlow script, J-job, ex-script, modulefile and makefile.

.. _dataflow:

Dataflow
========

Distributed Brokered Networking (DBNet) is used to disseminate products operationally from WCOSS.
DBNet is a series of server/client daemons that are controlled by table and key relationships.
To disseminate a product, jobs running on WCOSS make a call to the ``dbn_alert`` executable which makes the DBNet software aware of the new product.
Then, based on entries in several different tables, the product can be sent to one or more external servers.
The NCO Dataflow Team is responsible for maintaining DBNet. Any alert that is new or changing needs to be coordinated with the Dataflow Team so that the product will continue to go to all of the external customers specified in the governing tables.
All DBNet alerts must be wrapped in a check for ``$SENDDBN`` (or ``$SENDDBN_NTC``) equal to “``YES``”.
Example call:

.. code-block:: bash

   $DBNROOT/bin/dbn_alert MODEL PMB_GB2 $job $COMOUT/$outputfile

**DBN Alert Fields**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Field","Description"
   "Type [ ``MODEL`` ]","Generic data type"
   "Subtype [ ``PMB_GB2`` ]","Specific data type under the generic type"
   "Job Name [ ``$job`` ]","Name of the process that alerted the file, this is only used in the log output. It can be helpful when trying to identify the job that called ``dbn_alert``"
   "File [ ``$COMOUT/$outputfile`` ]","File to be alerted; must include the full path."

.. _code_delivery_structure:

Code Delivery and Vertical Structure
====================================

All components of an application to be run in the NCO production environment must be delivered to IDSB's Senior Production Analysts (SPA) via subversion, git or any other version control system that WCOSS has access to.
When modifying an application that is already in production, always begin with the most recent production version at ``https://svnwcoss.ncep.noaa.gov/MODEL/tags/``.


A. Source Code Compilation (C or Fortran)
-----------------------------------------

The directory structure, compilation scripts, makefiles, and documentation for building must be understandable to someone unfamiliar with the specifics of your model.
Do not deliver pre-built executables or libraries to IDSB. It is the SPA's responsibility to build all code before it is run in production.

* If more than one executable is to be built, divide the source files into sub-directories according to the executable they produce.
* The only exception is if multiple executables share a large portion of their code base in which case sub-directory sharing is allowed.
* The name of each source directory must be the name of the executable it produces plus the appropriate extension (.cd or .fd for C or Fortran code, respectively).
* If multiple executables are produced then their names must resemble the base source directory name.
* All source code must be delivered with a build script, and optionally a module file, used to set up the build environment.
* It must define the compiler and its version (by loading the appropriate versioned compiler), specific library versions, and all other external files used to compile the application.
* An example modulefile can be found in Example 12 of `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_. Creating symbolic links to external resources (e.g. to absolute paths) is not allowed.
* The modulefile or script *must not* reference unused software.
* WCOSS uses the Lmod environmental module system, therefore all module files must be in Lmod/Lua format
* Each source code directory must have a makefile that does everything needed to build the executable.
    For example, ``global_fcst.fd`` would contain Fortran code and a makefile to produce the ``global_fcst`` executable.
* The basic ‘``make``’ command must not move the compiled binary; however, ‘``make install``’ may do so.
* The makefile *must not* include references to unused libraries. Example 13 of `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_ contains an example.
* See Environment Equivalence (EE) standards for more details about builds
* The resulting executable(s) must continue to work if the original build path is removed or renamed (eg, when moving the package from ops/para to ops/prod).
* There are four critical targets that must be defined in every makefile. They are ``all``, ``debug``, ``install``, and ``clean``.
* Additionally, a ``test`` target is required to run unit tests for libraries and utility programs.
* Example 13 of `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_ contains an example of each.
* The ``debug`` target must minimally contain the ``check all`` and ``ftrapuv`` flags in fortran or their equivalent in other accepted languages
* Use a readme file in the source directory to explain the build process, particularly if it requires any interaction or if it is non-standard in any way;
    for example, in situations where a makefile produces more than one executable.
* Clear, concise instructions (see Example 10 in `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_) will reduce confusion and errors if it becomes necessary to rebuild the executable quickly.


B. Directory Structures
-----------------------

All components of an application to be implemented into the production environment are required to be in vertical structure, where, with the exception of system or standard production libraries and input data, all of the files required to completely build and run the jobs are contained in an application-specific package.
The package must contain all ``J-jobs`` and ``ex-scripts`` specific to the model and must be named with the following format: ``model.vX.Y.Z`` (e.g. ``gfs.v12.0.1``).
Files must be organized into sub-directories according to their type (see Table 3).
If there exists code, scripts or other files shared between multiple models then they must reside in a separate shared package (e.g. ``model_shared.v5.0.0``).
Shared packages must not contain ``J-jobs`` or a jobs sub-directory. Shared packages must be backward compatible.

**Table 3: Package Sub-directories**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Subdirectory","Description"
   "``doc``","release notes or other documentation"
   "``jobs``","J-jobs"
   "``scripts``","ex-scripts"
   "``ush``","utility scripts (ush-scripts)"
   "``sorc``","source code that can be compiled"
   "``exec``","binary executables"
   "``parm``","parameter files"
   "``parm/wmo``","Specific subdirectory under ./parm for WMO GRIB headers"
   "``fix``","fixed fields, tables or other static input data"
   "``lib``","model-specific libraries"
   "``ecf``","ecFlow scripts and definition files"
   "``gempak``","all gempak-related files"
   "``versions``","contains run.ver and build.ver, which are files that get automatically sourced in order to track package versions at run time and compile time, respectively (e.g., ""export bufr_ver=11.4.0; export gempak_ver=7.3.3""; export lmp_ver=v2.4.0. The “v” is excluded for module versions)."
   "``modulefiles/``","model module files"



Table 4 lists the primary data and application directories used within the WCOSS NCO production environment.
These directories can be located using the variables defined in the ``prod_envir`` module (see Example 7 in `Appendix A: Workflow Examples`_).

**Table 4: WCOSS directory structure**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Directory","Description"
   "``prod``","applications/packages in the production suite"
   "``test``","applications/packages in the test suite (unscheduled)"
   "``para``","applications/packages in the parallel suite (scheduled)"
   "``${envir}/com``","data and application output, including outgoing products"
   "``${envir}/dcom``","incoming data (retrieved from outside WCOSS)"
   "``${envir}/brs``","backup of production packages"
   "``${envir}/tmp``","temporary working directories for running jobs"



Data from external sources is stored in ``dcom`` and model output is stored in ``com``.
The output folder of the com directory contains PBS Pro job stdout and stderr.
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) headed output products are placed in a model's com structure under a ``wmo`` subdirectory.
Model output products in GEMPAK format (grids, model vertical profiles) are placed in the model's com structure under a ``gempak`` subdirectory.
Table 5 (below), Table 7, Table 8, and Table 9 (in `Appendix B: Variables and Directory Structure Tables`_) show the structures of com, and dcom directories, respectively.

**Table 5: Structure of COM directories**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "``/lfs/h1/ops/`` subdirectory","Description"
   "``prod/com/NET/$ver/RUN.YYYYMMDD``","production model output for a day"
   "``test/com/NET/$ver/RUN.YYYYMMDD``","test model output for a day"
   "``para/com/NET/$ver/RUN.YYYYMMDD``","parallel model output for a day"
   "``prod/com/output/YYYYMMDD``","production job stdout/stderr for a day"
   "``test/com/output/YYYYMMDD``","test job stdout/stderr for a day"
   "``para/com/output/YYYYMMDD``","parallel job stdout/stderr for a day"
   "``prod/com/output/transfer/YYYYMMDD``","transfer job stdout/stderr for a day"
   "``prod/com/output/logs``","log files"




C. Unresolved Bugs
------------------

Before handing off code to NCO, all Bugzilla entries must be addressed.
Please mark all items that have been resolved as such and add a brief complete explanation of the resolution, including relevant files modified to address the bug.
The SPA will then verify the fix during testing and close the bug following implementation.
If a bug cannot be resolved, a comment must be added and approval received from the SPA team lead.


.. _appendices:

Appendix A: Workflow Examples
=============================

All examples are for job ``jpmb_forecast``.
Model name is ``nco`` and type of model run is ``pmb``.

**Example 5: Version file ``run.ver`` / ``build.ver``**

The version file tracks the versions of all packages and modules used by your application.
It must not reference packages or modules that are not used.

.. code-block:: bash

   # Description                          # Variable assignment
   export nco_shared_ver=v1.0.6           # set the shared code version
   export grib_util_ver=1.0.1           # set the grib_util version



**Example 6: Job card jpmb_forecast.ecf**

In production, ecFlow preprocesses ecFlow scripts to generate job cards that are submitted to PBS Pro.
On WCOSS, production paths are set by loading the ``prod_envir`` module (Example 7).
To read or write files from a development space, point the variables in your job card to the appropriate location(s).

.. code-block:: bash

   # PBS Directives                             # Description
   #PBS -N %E%pmb_forecast_00                   # job name
   #PBS -A %PROJ%-%PROJENVIR%                   # project identifier
   #PBS -q %QUEUE%                              # PBS Pro queue name
   #PBS -S /bin/sh                              # login shell
   #PBS -l walltime=01:00:00                    # wall clock
   #PBS -l select=8                             # Request 8 nodes

   export model=pmb

   %include <head.h>                            # begin ecFlow communication
   %include <envir-p1.h>                       # set up environment

   export cyc=%CYC%                             # set the cycle

   export MPICH_GNI_MAX_EAGER_MSG_SIZE=65536    # define parallel environment variables
   export FORT_BUFFERED=TRUE

   module load util_shared/$util_shared_ver    # load only modules need for this job
   module load grib_util/$grib_util_ver

   $HOMEpmb/jobs/JPMB_FORECAST                 # call J-job

   %include <tail.h>                            # end ecFlow communication



.. note:: 
   The ``envir-phase.h`` include files set the following environment variables in addition to loading the ``prod_envir`` and ``prod_util`` modules:
   ``job``, ``SENDDBN``, ``SENDDBN_NTC``, ``KEEPDATA``, ``DBNROOT``, ``COREROOT``, ``SENDECF``, ``SENDCOM``


**Example 7: prod_envir module**

To see what a module will do, run the “``module show``” or “``module display``” command.

.. code-block:: text

   $ module display prod_envir
   -------------------------------------------------------------------
      /apps/ops/prod/nco/modulefiles/prod_envir/2.0.3.lua:
   -------------------------------------------------------------------
   setenv("OPSROOT","/lfs/h1/ops/prod")
   setenv("OPSROOTssd","/lfs/f1/ops/prod")
   setenv("COMROOT","/lfs/h1/ops/prod/com")
   setenv("DATAROOT","/lfs/f1/ops/prod/tmp")
   setenv("DCOMROOT","/lfs/h1/ops/prod/dcom")
   setenv("PACKAGEROOT","/lfs/h1/ops/prod/packages")



**Example 8: J-job JPMB_FORECAST**

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh

   date                                   # print starting time
   export PS4='+ $SECONDS + '              # prepend time to output
   set -x                                 # enable verbose logging

   export DATA=${DATA:-${DATAROOT:?}/${jobid:?}} # create temporary working directory
   mkdir -p $DATA
   cd $DATA

   export cycle=${cycle:-t${cyc}z}          # set up temporal variables, including PDY
   setpdy.sh
   . ./PDY

   export SENDDBN=${SENDDBN:-YES}          # alert output via DBNet
   export SENDDBN_NTC=${SENDDBN_NTC:-YES}  # alert wmo output
   export SENDECF=${SENDECF:-YES}          # send signals to ecFlow

   export USHpmb=$HOMEpmb/ush              # sub-directories of the current model
   export EXECpmb=$HOMEpmb/exec
   export PARMpmb=$HOMEpmb/parm
   export FIXpmb=$HOMEpmb/fix

   export NET=${NET:-pmb}                  # variables used in com directory organization
   export RUN=${RUN:-pmb}

   export COMINgfs=${COMINgfs:-$(compath.py gfs/${gfs_ver}/gfs.$PDY)} # locations of incoming data
   export COMIN=${COMIN:-$(compath.py ${NET}/${pmb_ver}/$RUN.$PDY)}

   export COMOUT=${COMOUT:-$(compath.py -o ${NET}/${pmb_ver}/$RUN.$PDY)} # locations of outgoing data
   export COMOUTwmo=${COMOUTwmo:-${COMOUT}/wmo}
   export COMOUTgempak=${COMOUTgempak:-${COMOUT}/gempak}

   mkdir –p $COMOUT $COMOUTgempak $COMOUTwmo # create output directories

   export pgmout=OUTPUT.$$                 # output for executables

   env                                    # print current environment

   $HOMEpmb/scripts/expmb_forecast.sh     # execute ex-script
   export err=$?; err_chk                 # error checking

   if [ -e "$pgmout" ]; then              # print exec output
     cat $pgmout
   fi

   if [ "${KEEPDATA^^}" != YES ]; then    # remove temporary working directory
     rm –rf $DATA
   fi

   date                                   # print ending time



**Example 9: ex-script expmb_forecast.sh**

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh

   # Program Name: pmb_forecast
   # Author(s)/Contact(s): First Last
   # Abstract: Driver script for pmb forecast
   # History Log:
   #   5/2014: Added error checking
   #   8/2014: Modified for WCOSS
   #
   # Usage:
   #  Parameters: None
   #  Input Files:
   #    pmb.tHHz.anl
   #  Output Files:
   #    pmb.tHHz.fFFF.grib2
   #
   # Condition codes:
   #    99  - Missing input file
   #
   # User controllable options: None

   set -x                                 # enable verbose logging

   cpreq $COMIN/inputfile inputfile       # copy essential input files into working directory

   export pgm=pmb_forecast               # name of the binary executable

   . prep_step                            # clear Fortran unit assignments
   export FORT11=$FIXpmb/inputfile.tbl   # set Fortran unit assignments
   export FORT12=inputfile
   export FORT60=outputfile.grib2

   # log program start (startmsg no longer required)
   mpiexec <options> $EXECmodel/$pgm >>$pgmout 2>errfile # execute MPI program
   export err=$?; err_chk                 # error checking

   # If multiple nodes were requested and the remainder of the job is serial processing,
   # release the extra nodes to make them available to other jobs.
   # See pbs_release_nodes man page for more options.
   # <pbs_release_nodes -a>

   if [ -s outputfile.grib2 ]; then       # check for required output
     cpfs outputfile.grib2 $COMOUT/outputfile.grib2 # copy output file to output directory
     if [ "${SENDDBN^^}" = YES ]; then    # alert output file
       $DBNROOT/bin/dbn_alert MODEL PMB_FCST \
           $job $COMOUT/outputfile.grib2
     fi
   else                                   # terminate the job if the expected output cannot be found
     err_exit "outputfile.grib2 was not generated"
   fi

   . prep_step                            # setup for tocgrib2 exec
   export FORT11=outputfile.grib2        # define input file
   export FORT51=grib2.t${cyc}.z.pmb.f000 # define output file

   $TOCGRIB2 <$PARMpmb/grib2_awp_pmbf000 >>$pgmout 2>errfile # add WMO header to file
   if [ $? –ne 0 ]; then                  # error checking
     msg="WARNING: WMO header not added to $FORT51"
     postmsg $jlogfile "$msg"
     echo "$msg" | mail.py
   fi



**Example 10: build readme file sorc/README**

.. code-block:: text

   Build instructions:
   cd to the sorc directory

   to build all executables:
      ./build_pmb.sh

   to build one or more executables, provide their name(s) as parameter(s):
      ./build_pmb.sh pmb_forecast pmb_post

   to install all executables:
     ./install_pmb.sh

   to clean sorc directory:
        ./clean_pmb.sh



**Example 11: build script sorc/build_pmb.sh**

sorc/install_pmb.sh and sorc/clean_pmb.sh are identical except replace “``make``” with “``make install``” and “``make clean``”, respectively.
These scripts can be combined into a single script using arguments.

.. code-block:: bash

   #!/bin/sh
   set –x                                 # enable verbose logging

   module reset
   module use ../modulefiles
   module load build_pmb.module

   sorc_root=$PWD

   function build_dir {
     cd ${sorc_root}/$1                   # move to the source directory of the given executable
     make                                 # make the executable
     if [ $? –ne 0 ]; then                # print error message if build is unsuccessful
       echo "ERROR: build of $1 FAILED!"
     fi
   }

   if [ $# -eq 0 ]; then                  # if no parameters were given,
     for source_dir in *.fd; do           # build all executables
       build_dir $source_dir              # enter the build_dir function
     done
   else                                   # if one or more executables were requested,
     for source_dir in $*; do             # build those that were requested
       build_dir $source_dir.fd           # enter the build_dir function
     done
   fi



**Example 12: modulefiles/build_pmb.module (to be loaded prior to compilation)**

.. code-block:: lua

   --%Module####################################################
   --                                                 First.Last@noaa.gov
   --                                                 ORGANIZATION
   -- PMB-FCST v1.1.0
   --############################################################
   -- DOCBLOCK

   proc ModulesHelp { } {
     -- module help
     puts stderr "Set environment variables for PMB-FCST"
     puts stderr "This module initializes the user’s"
     puts stderr "environment to build the PMB model at NCEP"
   }

   -- module description
   module-whatis  "PMB-FCST whatis description"

   -- set version and compiler variables
   set    ver v1.1.0
   setenv COMP intel
   setenv FC ftn

   -- Load Cray parallel environment
   module load  cray-mpich/$::env(cray_mpich_ver)

   -- Load Intel programming environment
   module load intel/$::env(intel_ver)

   -- Load NCEP libs modules
   -- Versions come from sourcing versions/build.ver prior to loading module
   module load  hdf5/$::env(hdf5_ver)
   module load  netcdf/$::env(netcdf_ver)
   module load  bacio/$::env(bacio_ver)
   module load  w3nco/$::env(w3nco_ver)
   module load  jasper/$::env(jasper_ver)
   module load  libpng/$::env(libpng_ver)
   module load  zlib/$::env(zlib_ver)



**Example 13: sorc/pmb_forecast.fd/makefile**

.. code-block:: make

   ###############################################################
   #  Makefile for xxx
   #  Use:
   #    make         - build the executable
   #    make install - move the built executable into the exec dir
   #    make clean   - start with a clean slate
   ###############################################################
   # Makefile DOCBLOCK containing instructions and use

   # Tunable parameters:
   #   FC Name of the FORTRAN compiling system to use
   #   LDFLAGS Options of the loader
   #   FFLAGS Options of the compiler
   #   DEBUG Options of the compiler included for debugging
   #   LIBS List of libraries
   #   CMD Name of the executable

   # name of compiler
   FC      = ftn
   # options of the loader
   LDFLAGS = -O -convert big_endian
   # executable location
   BINDIR  = ../../exec
   # include files
   INC     = ${G2_INC4}
   # libraries (variables from Lmod modules)
   LIBS    = ${G2_LIB4} ${W3NCO_LIB4} ${BACIO_LIB4} ${JASPER_LIB} ${PNG_LIB} ${Z_LIB}
   # executable name
   CMD     = pmb_forecast
   # debug options
   DEBUG   = -check all -ftrapuv
   # compiler options
   FFLAGS  = -g  -traceback  -O3 -I $(INC)

   # Lines from here down should not need to be changed. They are
   # the actual rules which make uses to build CMD.

   OBJS = $(patsubst %.f,%.o,$(wildcard *.f))

   all: $(CMD)

   $(CMD): $(OBJS)
        $(FC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $(@) $(OBJS) $(LIBS)

   debug: FFLAGS += $(DEBUG)
   debug: all

   test: $(CMD)
        $(CMD) < input.txt > output.txt
        diff output.txt valid_output.txt

   install: $(CMD)
        mv $(CMD) ${BINDIR}/

   clean:
        -rm -f $(OBJS) *.mod $(CMD)




Appendix B: Variables and Directory Structure Tables
====================================================

**Table 6: Binary executable production utilities accessible via module variables**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Variable","exec","Description","Module"
   "``CNVGRIB``","``cnvgrib``","Converts between GRIB1 and GRIB2","``grib_util``"
   "``COPYGB``","``copygb``","Copies all or part of GRIB1 file to another GRIB1 file","``grib_util``"
   "``COPYGB2``","``copygb2``","Copies all or part of GRIB2 file to another GRIB2 file","``grib_util``"
   "``DEGRIB2``","``degrib2``","Creates inventory of GRIB2 file","``grib_util``"
   "``GRB2INDEX``","``grb2index``","Creates index file from GRIB2 file","``grib_util``"
   "``GRBINDEX``","``grbindex``","Creates index file from GRIB1 file","``grib_util``"
   "``GRIB2GRIB``","``grib2grib``","Extracts GRIB records from a GRIB file made by gribawp1","``grib_util``"
   "``TOCGRIB``","``tocgrib``","Adds WMO header in front of each GRIB1 field","``grib_util``"
   "``TOCGRIB2``","``tocgrib2``","Adds WMO header in front of each GRIB2 field","``grib_util``"
   "``WGRIB``","``wgrib``","Creates inventory and decodes GRIB1 files","``grib_util``"
   "``WGRIB2``","``wgrib2``","Creates inventory and decodes GRIB2 files","``wgrib2``"
   "``NDATE``","``ndate``","Date utility","``prod_util``"
   "``MDATE``","``mdate``","Date utility","``prod_util``"
   "``NHOUR``","``nhour``","Date utility","``prod_util``"
   "``FSYNC``","``fsync_file``","Synchronize file across GPFS","``prod_util``"



**Table 8: Structure of sub-directories under com**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Subdirectory","Description"
   "``$COMROOT/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY/wmo``","WMO headed output products"
   "``$COMROOT/$NET/$model_ver/$RUN.$PDY/gempak``","gempak output products"



**Table 9: Structure of DCOMROOT directory**

.. csv-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 0
   :widths: auto

   "Subdirectory","Description"
   "``$DCOMROOT/YYYYMMDD``","incoming data for one day"
   "``$DCOMROOT/YYYYMM``","Incoming data for one month (select types only)"
   "``$DCOMROOT/YYYYMMDD/bTTT/xxSSS``","BUFR data tanks"


*TTT* and *SSS* correspond to the 3-digit BUFR data category type and sub-type, respectively